I'm Vicki MacDonald and I'm at Holy Trinity Church in London now for the exhibition of
The Longest Yarn and I have Gwyneth Peters with me and she's going to talk about her
childhood in Anglesey during the wartime.
Thank you Gwyneth.
Right.
My name was Gwyneth Brown.
I was born and brought up in Hollyhead where I was born in 1935 at which time during the
war my father was away with Trinity House and clearing the mines, following the minesweepers,
but we had the army in Tee-Croix, we had the Royal Air Force in Valley and we had the Navy
in Hollyhead and there was a barrage, I remember the barrage balloons floating up high to stop
the Germans bombing.
So I was brought up on going along the seashore looking for tins of flour, the sweetened flour
that came from the Canadian ships that had been torpedoed on the way to Liverpool.
My father being a seaman, he used to bring home seagull's eggs and we used to look for
this sweetened flour and we would have pancakes.
And was the sweetened flour in good condition?
In cans, in good condition in cans, yes.
The other interesting thing that was from each of the ships in the harbour in Hollyhead,
there were barrage balloons and my mother kept having little babies when my father came
home from war and she wanted something waterproof to put in the cot.
So when the barrage balloons were blown up by enemy fire, you could use this material
from the barrage balloons to use as waterproofing for putting underneath the sheet in the baby's
cot.
So that was one thing.
The other thing I remember is going to Rosneiger and where the RAF camp was and we used to
go to their rubbish heap looking for food scraps and I think we did find a necklace
one time, some beads, but if we saw the Americans we'd say, got any gum, chum?
And that's what we would, and sometimes they would give us some chewing gum and if you
know we didn't have sweets and all that because there was so many Russians.
So and the other thing, did I mention that my father used to bring home seagulls eggs?
Yes and you had pancakes.
And we had pancakes.
I know you've mentioned seagull eggs before.
What do they taste like Gwyneth?
I don't know, I can't remember because I was born in 35.
So you know I was only 10 when the war finished wasn't I?
They must have tasted slightly fishy.
Probably.
But I was so used to eating winkles.
Winkles and don't eat dog whelks, they're not very good.
And you have to cook them with nettles.
And I didn't realize until I studied botany at university that the Latin name for nettle
is urticaria and the disease on my face was called urticaria but it was because I was
eating winkles cooked with net stinging nettles.
So were your your father was at sea then?
He was at sea.
During the war?
Yeah.
And your mother was left with how many of you at home?
Well the first one was born in 33.
My brother Gwilym was born in 1933 and she had Gwyneth 35, Eileen 37, Gilbert 1940, Avril 1942,
and then the poor woman thought that she was all passed it all and in 1949 she had her sixth child
David who still lives in and my three brothers were all apprentices to be marine engineers
so they went around the world.
But the sad thing that my mother's brother Eddie was a flying officer and he'd been on a sortie in
Italy and coming back to south of England he was shot down by friendly fire
and it was they thought that it was a German airplane but it was in fact
Was he killed?
And he was killed and he was a golf professional in Chester.
I lost my cousin but it all said lost at sea.
He was my cousin also my father was William Robert Brown he was William Robert Brown
and then I had one of my mother's brothers was lieutenant colonel and he was very involved in
the army so we lost my father's brother my father's nephew and my mother's brother in the war.
So that was very sad.
Very sad.
Yes.
But my
Very difficult for your mother.
Yeah very difficult for my mother and she had to you know live off
all because rushing but the interesting thing about my husband he was an only child
living in London and he was somewhere by Clapham or something like that and his father and mother
were both on warden duty for the bombs and he was in his pajamas and house got bombed
and his mother did manage to rush and say get under the stairs.
He was found under the stairs in his pajamas by a policeman who took him to the vicarage
where they had a bundle of clothes on the floor said take some clothes but he had no shoes
but it was the eve of his 11 plus exam and he had been told you have a little pencil
and a protractor and if you come to school without the pencil and protractor you can't
do the 11 plus.
So he's been found by this policeman and he was taking him for the clothes he says please don't
leave me to the policeman because that's my 11 plus exam and the teacher won't let me in if I
don't have my protractor and pencil.
So the policeman stayed with him and true enough went to the primary school and the teacher
immediately said get out you can't come in here you haven't got your pencil or your protractor
and the policeman grabbed it by the shoulder and said this child was born at two o'clock in the
morning under the stairs he doesn't know where his parents are give him a pencil and a protractor
and he concentrated so much on passing that 11 plus he did pass.
He passed it down with his parents okay?
They took three days.
But they did find him.
They did find him his mother's face was even to she died when she was 83 or something her
face is still speckled with the black thing from the the bombing and she had a great big
hole in the calf of her leg from where she had been injured during the bombing but his father
went to a Iraq petroleum company and so they had no more children they had a divorce.
So but it's interesting.
Yes what an interesting story Gwena thank you so much that's so kind of you.
I really appreciate your stories thank you.